---
title: "A dark grey corona"
permalink: /corona
---
# “A dark grey corona”: Disco Elysium and the Deconstruction of Identity
## Abstract
Disco Elysium deconstructs identity as we understand it. Whether that be personal identity, national identity, or the identity of the game and genre itself, Disco Elysium does not allow itself or its contents to be neatly categorized. By resisting commonly held ideas of the player, we are forced into a viewpoint that emphasizes the interconnectedness and complexity of all reality. Through a synthesis of the Gothic presented in Disco Elysium as Gothic fiction by J. Novitz, Jonne Arjoranta’s work on game hermeneutics, and the various explorations of narrative multiplicity in Disco Elysium, this paper will explain how Disco Elysium leverages a mass of unsolidity (the world of the Pale, the non-place) against the grounded yet shaken world of people, places, and things in Elysium. The world of Disco Elysium, Elysium, is steeped in history and identities as they merge into each other, with seemingly clear-cut boundaries between them falling apart with further scrutiny. In other words, Disco Elysium is a portrait of our world that proposes a radically decentered identity through rigorously challenging the player in narrative and gameplay alike. In such a world divided and violent against itself, Disco Elysium provides a much-needed deconstruction of common assumptions of identity that is lacking today in much modern ideological discourse. Through analyzing the world of Disco Elysium, we catch a glimpse of a world much like ours – a beautiful and broken place that aches to be understood – and through the experiences of our avatar Harrier "Harry" Du Bois, we get an idea of how to move forward.

### Keywords
identity, narrative agency, genre deconstruction, game ontology, ludic narrative, innovative storytelling

## Introduction
Disco Elysium: The Final Cut (ZA/UM, 2022), henceforth referred to as Disco Elysium, is a classic roleplaying game (cRPG) that describes itself as a “detective RPG”. Released on March 30th, 2021, it was met with critical acclaim and a dedicated fanbase, quickly gaining renown as a masterpiece of interactive media. Disco Elysium currently as of this writing stands at a rating of 97 out of 100 in the PC section of games on Metacritic, making it the highest ranked PC game in the history of the site (Metacritic, 2023). 

Written and directed by the Estonian Robert Kurvitz, Disco Elysium takes inspiration from the world of Eastern Europe, as well as the pre-Soviet and pre-Cold War eras. A heavy amount of the literature surrounding Disco Elysium has come from academics based in Eastern Europe, and much been published in journals such as the Baltic Screen Media Review. Despite the heavy Eastern European influence, Disco Elysium has become a worldwide cult favorite due to its complex political themes, intricate storytelling, and refusal to shy away from dark themes. The commentary of Disco Elysium has become the subject of great discourse among fans, with online discussions analyzing the world and characters being commonplace.

However, even though the game has been received incredibly well, there is a lack of academic discussion about many of its themes, including that of the way identity itself is handled. Identity is, as one might expect, a core part of RPGs, and Disco Elysium does not shy away from handling it. Just as the text analyzes and deconstructs other aspects of its story, Disco Elysium addresses the concept of identity and self head-on, discussing the identity of the avatar, the identity of the world, and the identity of the genre. Each is addressed in its own unique way, each linked with each other to create a whole discourse of self.

## Identity of Digital Literature
Before discussing the content of Disco Elysium itself, it's worth delving into the context of the medium of electronic literature. Spanning several types of creations, from the more literary interactive fiction to the more ludic form of the RPG, electronic literature employs a combination of techniques from traditional literature and digital media. Referred to as a "child" of these types of media and also as a devalued "monster", electronic literature is a somewhat neglected form of storytelling in the world of literary criticism (Pressman, 2019). 

Disco Elysium is more like electronic literature than a video game, although both in themselves are "hybrid genres", as stated before (Ensslin, 2014). Disco Elysium's literary elements take center-stage, but the ludic elements land it solidly in the medium of a video game, just an incredibly literary one. The form of interactive fiction particularly seems to have influenced Disco Elysium. IF itself is a very inventive form, focusing mostly on "character techniques and character complexity, multiple perspectives, or different endings and/or storylines without victory conditions", traits we often find in Disco Elysium as well (Ensslin, 2014). The analysis of electronic literature has been proposed by Katherine Hayles to require both the "specificity of new media without abandoning the rich resources of traditional modes of understanding" (Hayles, 2008).

As such, this paper will take the electronic mode of Disco Elysium as not a circumstance but a necessary addition to the rich web of its storytelling. Disco Elysium could not exist as it does without being both an electronic and a literary medium, and so it is only appropriate to consider the special context of electronic literature and its themes.

## Identity of the Avatar
Our avatar, a man later revealed to be named Harrier “Harry” Du Bois (henceforth referred to as Harry), is introduced to us naked and hungover on the floor of a trashed hotel room. We have no knowledge of how he got here, who he is, what he is doing here, or why the room is in such a state. Neither does he, having lost his memory. Slowly, as the days progress, we learn that he is a decorated detective in a city called Martinaise to solve the murder of a local mercenary. The game progresses as our knowledge of Harry does, and as we begin to know him, we begin to mold him.

The first words we hear in this game, however, are not the voice of another or the voice of Harry himself. Instead, we are met with a deep, hoarse speech, telling us the simple truth of what we perceive – “There is nothing. Only warm, primordial blackness” (ZA/UM, 2022). The voice tells us more, that our consciousness is “fermenting”, that this death is “sweet and endless”, describing a “bloated *man-meat*” in which you both are contained (ZA/UM, 2022). This voice we are greeted with is one of Harry’s internal voices, a deeply hidden and terrifying part that we only encounter when Harry is unconscious.

Immediately after, we are awoken by the first of what we will soon learn is twenty-four “skills”, all speaking with the same internal voice but with wildly different personalities. Our skills offer Harry advice and comfort, as well as antagonize him from within. They function narratively as if they were entirely different characters, much akin to the trope of the angel and devil over one’s shoulder.
The game opening to a black screen, being greeted with an autonomous internal voice, and soon meeting the many parts of Harry’s internal consciousness is an immediate and nearly frightening departure from the concept of solid self that many are familiar with. We are given “a sense of a fractured and unbalanced mindset” reminiscent of Gothic literature rather than that of roleplaying games (Novitz, 2021). Already, both the genre and the self have been called into question. 

There’s an added dimension in that the distinctions between skills are, to put it lightly, confusing. One author noted that “the skills do not have discrete and individualized gameplay functions but overlap with one another” (Novitz 2021). Rather than simple angel and devil figures, each skill portrays a complex piece of Harry’s psyche. Each piece is linked together by virtue of sharing the same body, but are also functionally autonomous. One could compare it to the image of a divided council in which members strongly disagree on various ideas.

This doesn’t stop after the opening sequence, of course. The skills stay with the player the entire game, constantly in what can be best described as “competition and conversation” (Novitz, 2021). Rather than starting with an understanding of a whole character, we must help him piece himself together over the course of the game – and even then, he is never truly whole in the sense of his parts being united. He will always be somewhat fractured. 

## Identity and Choice
Even though this fragmented identity is central to how we perceive Harry, he is not a blank slate. The history of Elysium (the world of Disco Elysium), its characters, and the various objects around it weave together a complicated story. Indeed, a story in which there is no beginning context would be impossible, as “a neutral starting position does not exist, and interpretation from such a position would be impossible, since the interpretation would not be in relation to anything” (Arjoranta, 2022). If Harry were a blank slate to be projected onto, we would be unable to analyze him properly. So, Harry and the world around him must have some history to it, and that history is manifest in the choices we are given.

Harry’s choices affect the way he is able to interact with the world. His thoughts, skills, and chosen viewpoints change how others perceive him in a realistic manner, but also change Harry to an extent that they “[affect] whether – and how well – some actions can be carried out” (Belmonte, 2021). The player can make many choices on what Harry does and how he evolves, but all of these choices are not truly free choices. Like in many other forms of interactive fiction, the choices are not limitless.

Described as a network of “”forking paths” [that] are fundamentally predetermined” in Playing stories?: Narrative-dramatic agency in Disco Elysium and Astroneer, we are never given the chance to make a truly “free” choice (Bodi and Thon, 2020). Harry’s lifetime, his failures, his successes, and the chance of his potential recovery have all been encoded inside the game. You cannot escape it, and you cannot give yourself over to any illusion that you can write your own ending for him. His endings have already been written.

This conclusion that Harry is a being with limited paths is caused by Harry’s deep history and lack of “blank slate” identity. He is an avatar touched deeply by the rest of the world, and thus he has limited options that he is capable of. He was molded for each and every one, and each story set out for him makes sense. Simply put, Harry is a person, and people are nudged forward by their history. The player can, at times, be forced to be cruel or make intense social blunders upon the failure of checks. These failures, while not something the player would do, allow us a glimpse into Harry’s psyche. 

We are not “penalized” for failure as is typical of ludic narratives, but are instead rewarded with a “richer narrative experience”; we are not in this game to choose what we see as the best option, but we are meant to explore Harry, much like one explores the world around him (Bodi and Thon, 2020). The goal of our choices are not to change the world, but to change Harry and understand the world. And that in turn allows us to change the world, as the world of Elysium and the self are intrinsically linked.

## Identity of Object and Place
The city-state of Revachol, the primary setting for Disco Elysium, is just as alive as the rest of the characters and voices Harry interacts with. In pivotal moments (and some silly ones), the spirit of Revachol herself is able to speak to Harry through the skill “Shivers”, a skill which also is able to tell Harry about happenings across the city that he could not possibly have been privy to otherwise. The world around Harry is not a static environment. We are given many opportunities to interact with and even speak with it. Harry is able to speak to items just as easily as he can speak to the human characters of the story.

With the added idea of a living Revachol and a story in which objects can hold as much influence as living beings, the way characters interact with their surroundings takes on new meaning. There is an assertion of the living relationship between the city and her people, of the land and her people, of her people and her people. Even the objects of Elysium, as discussed before, live. These objects evoke a sort of animism, able to speak to Harry and “offer knowledge about the protagonist’s narrative identity” (Kłosiński, 2021). 
Often the object is treated as if it is alive, with even dead bodies being handled in such a way. Objects can be so-called “identity mirrors” for the avatar (Kłosiński, 2021). Harry’s speaking tie serves as an example, an impulsive and angry but well-meaning thing that speaks to Harry as long as he wears it. Notably, the dead body of the murder victim can be seen as an identity mirror of Harry as well. The objects of the world of Elysium know him better than he knows himself. The relationship is living, “mutual”, more than a “one-sided investigation” (Kłosiński 2021). It is communal in nature. Harry is shaped by the world around him as the world is shaped by Harry. 

In Elysium, history and the land itself literally speak to our avatar. Objects that represent identity mirrors are just as alive as the rest of the characters. Disco Elysium provides the groundwork for an “object-oriented ontology” (Kłosiński 2021), with the human experience shattered and decentered. Instead, the general consensus of literature is that Harry is a moment of possibility and communication. Harry is an “interlocutor”, a being forced to “literally experience his own otherness” as the player is forced to experience it as well (Kłosiński 2021). 

These ideas are not solely expressed through Harry, either. If you kick a mailbox, you will be rewarded with disapproval from the main supporting character, Kim Kitsuragi, and his approval if you choose to gently pat it. Harry is not the only one who perceives life in the world, although others do not perceive it as intensely as he does. It can be said that the whole narrative of Disco Elysium centers around things that are dead or were never living, either in the literal or metaphorical sense. As mentioned before, Harry is compared to both a tie and a dead body. Metaphorically and ontologically, Harry is just as much an object as he is a human.

Through the idea of the living place, objects that know the protagonist (and imply death or inhumanity), and the acknowledgement of these truths by other characters, Disco Elysium gives the impression of a game that is representing a sort of interconnected web of life. In Disco Elysium, everything is somewhat alive, and everything and everyone has a story to tell. 

## Identity of Genre
If going into the game blind, one likely enters Disco Elysium expecting what the game describes itself as; a gritty detective RPG in which a hardened cop solves a murder. What you get is something entirely different. While the game could certainly be described as “gritty” with a certain definition of the word, and I’ve heard “grungy” in a conversation with friends, there is a mystical air to the game and its world. It goes beyond the rough and tough and leech into the realm of the Gothic, as mentioned before in other sections of this paper. 

Elysium is best categorized as a classic RPG, but the implications of a detective RPG are lost. While it’s important and central to the story that Harry is a detective, the narrative drifts away from the focus of finding the murderer. 

Disco Elysium as Gothic Fiction describes the way some players are unsatisfied when looking at the game through the viewpoint of detective fiction, feeling cheated by the ending and it’s almost anticlimactic revelation of the killer. We find at the very end that the murderer of our mercenary is a mysterious character we have never met before, and the conclusion is not one that could have possibly been come to before that. It violates the idea of fair play. As proposed by Novitz, however, this is because Disco Elysium is not detective fiction, but is rather a piece of Gothic fiction.

Elysium is touched by a mysterious and haunting non-place called the Pale. It is what sits between isolas, the in-world equivalent of continents, of which there are seven. This is the heart of Novitz’ argument and is the heart of the deconstruction of place-identity in Disco Elysium. By non-place, it is meant as a place that is not a place. The Pale is not solid, liquid or gas; it is unable to be measured in any meaningful way. It is simply there, if it can be said to be present at all. There, reality itself breaks down into a sort of information soup, collapsing time and moments on top of each other. 

Not only does this collapse all identity within itself, leading (as I will address later) to mixing the memories of people who have found themselves within it, but it also erases the history and meaning of the land itself. When removed from the context of place and character, what was once meaningful becomes an almost chaotic meaninglessness. The context we have relied on before is shattered. And so, as the genre is deconstructed, so is the land and place itself torn from its context and thrown into, as I called it before, an information soup.

## The Heart of the Gothic
Not only do many of the more mysterious parts of Disco Elysium’s narrative support the conclusion of this game being a piece of Gothic literature, the deconstruction of identities itself is in itself also supported by the Gothic air. The identities of Disco Elysium "[disrupt] the boundaries between past and present", as well between the "personal and political", in time with Gothic tradition. The exploration of the avatar through choice rather than changing the game through choice also centers the horror of an "inescapable influence of political forces and history"; we are forced to take a look at our choices and what they lead to (Novitz, 2021). The game is, quite simply, built on the back of the Gothic idea.

The Gothic itself has been a point of great contention between scholars on the subject, leading to much debate. The genre has been notoriously called “unstable” by its critics (Rintoul, 2005). Gothic criticism is “aware of its own inability to define the genre”; Gothic scholars struggle to find hard boundaries and trends inside the Gothic itself, much less when literature takes Gothic influence, confusing the genre even more. Disco Elysium, as a game that lives in that fuzzy “in-between” area, is perfect for the Gothic genre and themes.

This serves the purpose of not only subverting genre expectations and deconstructing the concept of a detective game, but also serves to steer the player in the direction of understanding how their interactions with the text are received. We see directly the way the avatar and his shattered psyche are affected by our choices, as well as the way this internal development affects the world around him, much more clearly because of these Gothic elements. It allows room for the contradictions and nuances evident in the story, with skills, characters, and ideologies throughout Disco Elysium fighting for recognition as the truth when it really lies somewhere between the solid points. 

## Identity of the Pale
It is possible in Disco Elysium to meet a woman named the “Paledriver”. This is a character who has had long and intense exposure to the Pale and is a primary example of the intersection between the Gothic, identity, and character-focused storytelling of Disco Elysium. In her conversations we discover that her long-term exposure to the Pale has changed her as a person. She describes her memories as an amalgamation of the memories of others, remembering events that she could not possibly have attended. Despite the impossibility of her memory, she holds onto them as her own. When asked why, she says that they are "beautiful and true"; she describes the feeling of being inside the pale as a "terrible nostalgia", and the size as "bigger than anything". 

The description obviously evokes a sort of horror. Her discussions are once again extremely evocative of the Gothic but are also evocative of the perspective granted by Harry as our avatar. Her words of nostalgia, memories outside memories, and finding truth through communion with the world all parallel what Harry goes through in his quest to find himself.

# Conclusion
Where does this leave us? This leaves us in a place where interconnectedness is not an option but rather a default reality. Everything, even objects, speak to one another. The city itself is beautifully alive. Memory is subjective and fallible. Reality itself is collapsing into a place that is not a place at all. We are given a striking portrait of a world much like our own, with all of its uncertainty and interconnectedness. 

Like understanding Harry, to understand ourselves we must understand our context. Who were we? Where did we come from? We as humans do not have “neutral starting positions”, and we are not beings very separate from the other beings around us. The puzzle being solved in Disco Elysium is not the puzzle of the murder, as emphasized by the refusal of the detective genre, but the puzzle of this reality and all its pieces. 

Disco Elysium decenters and deconstructs human identity for the sake of creating something in between many modern video games' conceptions of genre, personal identity, and history. This evaluation paves the way for more complicated interactive narratives to take place. Asserting ways in which video games can be like reality, the player is not only able to learn lessons about themselves through exploring the world, but is given the chance to envision an entirely new way of telling stories. The exploration of complex moments and places take center stage over solving a mystery or finishing a quest. Rather than using the more simple (and still effective) method of setup to goal, Disco Elysium takes its players on a scenic journey of deep introspection. 

Players are called to understand the world and characters intimately through not only the unfolding story and its many variables but through the unique perspective that each playthrough provides, with no playthrough being exactly the same. Disco Elysium has set a precedent for storytelling and worldbuilding that builds on its own themes through every microcosm of the narrative, feeling less like a story and more like a journey in which the main ideas burrow themselves deep into every corner.
 
# References
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Arjoranta, J. (2022). How are games interpreted? Hermeneutics for game studies. Game Studies: the international journal of computer game research, 22(3).
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Belmonte, J. (2021). The Hanged Rhizome on the Tree: Arborescence and Multiplicity in Disco Elysium. Baltic Screen Media Review, 9(1) 44-54. https://doi.org/10.2478/bsmr-2021-0005
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bodi, B. & Thon, J. (2020). Playing stories?: Narrative-dramatic agency in Disco Elysium (2019) and Astroneer (2019). Frontiers of Narrative Studies, 6(2) 157-190. https://doi.org/10.1515/fns-2020-0012
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Ensslin, A. (2014). Literary gaming. MIT Press. https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucf/detail.action?docID=3339803
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hayles, N. K. (2008). Electronic literature: New horizons for the literary. University of Notre Dame Press. https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucf/detail.action?docID=3441028
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Kłosiński, M. (2021). The Object Gives Rise to Thought: Hermeneutics of Objects in Disco Elysium. Baltic Screen Media Review, 9(1) 56-66. https://doi.org/10.2478/bsmr-2021-0006
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Novitz, J. (2021). Disco Elysium as Gothic fiction. Baltic Screen Media Review, 9(1) 32-42. https://doi.org/10.2478/bsmr-2021-0004
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pressman, J. (2019). “Contexts of Digital Literature Criticism: Feminist, Queer, Materialist.” Hyperrhiz: New Media Cultures, no. 20, 2019. doi:10.20415/hyp/020.ex01
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rintoul, S. (2005). Gothic Anxieties: Struggling with a Definition. Eighteenth-Century Fiction 17(4), 701-709. https://doi.org/10.1353/ecf.2005.0006
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;What Games to Play on PC. (n.d.). Metacritic. Retrieved November 20, 2023, from https://web.archive.org/web/20231120004135/https://www.metacritic.com/browse/game/pc/
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;ZA/UM. (v. b8a132b0, 2022) [2019]. Disco Elysium: The Final Cut [Microsoft Windows]. Digital game designed by Robert Kurvitz and Alexander Rostov, published by ZA/UM. 






